DI Food and Bio: We must utilize alternative proteins if we are to create a CO2 reduction in the food system

If we are to make significant CO2 reductions in our food system, we must become better at developing and utilizing the biosolutions we already know, write branch director of DI Food and head of DI Bio, Leif Nielsen and Mikkel Valsted.
The temperature is rising, ecosystems are challenged, the Horn of Africa is affected by drought and in Pakistan the rivers are overflowing. Global food systems are under unprecedented pressure from war, inflation and pandemics.
In short, we find ourselves in an abundance of crises and imbalances on the globe.
But also crises that researchers from all over the world dedicate their lives to getting out of.
Whether it concerns climate change, loss of biodiversity or the food crisis, we can be sure that there are countless researchers at both companies and universities working around the clock on the solutions.
And fortunately, there are many of them today who can make a significant difference to the world's populations.
One of these solutions is the development of climate-efficient proteins that can replace and supplement the current animal proteins. The proteins come from, among other things, beans and quinoa, mushrooms and seaweed, which, when fermented, become just as tasty in your smashburger as a beef steak.
Yes, in fact, technology allows us to cultivate new, amazing tastes and can add future food experiences.
Fermentation is, on an equal footing with biorefining, one of the core technologies within biological solutions, also known as biosolutions.
It's fermentation that brews the enzymes in your toothpaste, that turns milk into cheese and yogurt, and that can turn beans into juicy burger patties.
Take advantage of the technologies we know
The development of new alternative proteins will not only mean that our protein consumption will require significantly less use of the globe's land areas. It will also lead to CO2 reductions and feed more mouths with the same amount of resources.
A recent report from Copenhagen Economics showed the potential of CO2 reductions.
The biosolutions we know today alone can globally reduce CO2 by 4,300 million tonnes by 2030. This corresponds to eight percent of global emissions today.
This is because biosolutions both lead to more efficient production processes, for example in the form of milk proteins created in fermentation tanks, just as good bacteria can shorten cheese ripening processes and extend the shelf life of many types of food.
All these examples are developed from fermentation, which is the same technology that is also used in developing alternative proteins.
Alternative proteins are a tool that we have known for a long time, but which has often been overlooked in the toolbox.
In fact, fermentation technology dates back thousands of years to when we first made cheese and fermented milk products. However, in relation to modern alternative foods, consumers have been somewhat skeptical, and as a result many companies have been reluctant to invest in the technologies behind them.
We would like to change that, as time is running out.
Must be the crises mature
On top of December's global biodiversity conference (COP15), it is clear that the global food system is challenged. In short, we are running out of room for an ever-growing population.
Fortunately, Danish companies within the biosolutions sector are jumping ahead to deliver the solutions of the future already tomorrow, and here we are the market leader on a global level.
Therefore, we must make it easier to get new foods on the market. To support the development of new, fermented foods and secure the foundation for us to grow proteins in steel tanks with precision fermentation.
To design our EU legislation to include an innovation principle when we assess biosolutions that can deliver on our green objectives.
The crises do not wait for us.
Fortunately, we have the tools from the Danish biosolutions industry to deliver significant CO2 reductions, while biosolutions also contribute to the solution of the other sustainability crises.
Among other reasons, biosolutions are an indispensable tool in the crisis toolbox. But also a tool that can only utilize its full potential if EU regulation helps.
And it is urgent to make it happen, because the imbalances will only get worse the longer we wait. The green transition requires the use of all tools to deal with the global crises.