Does soy have a future in Danish agriculture?

There are many climate-friendly options in the distribution of new Danish proteins such as horse beans. But green proteins cannot yet stand alone in Denmark, so it is crucial that sustainable soy continues to be prioritized by the sector and at Christiansborg, writes Martin Gregers Arnoldus.
The soya plant has a very central role as an ingredient in Danish food production, for example for use in feed in animal production. And that has actually been the case for many years.
Soy has a particularly good property in terms of adding proteins to the feed, which ensures that farm animals get the right nutrition. Very few other ingredients have been able to be as effective as soy in food production, as soy's composition of the so-called amino acids is close to ideal.
Soy, on the other hand, has also given rise to a political debate at home. The extreme political left has on several occasions attacked agriculture with criticism of the import of soy, which comes primarily from South America and China.
The criticism is particularly directed at deforestation and the inclusion of vulnerable natural areas with a harmful effect on biodiversity and climate.
In response to the criticism, the Danish food industry has made great demands that soy be produced under responsible conditions. For almost ten years, the soy suppliers have been met with demands from the Danish food companies to avoid child labour, oppression, discrimination against workers and deforestation, among other things.
In 2020, the Danish food industry tightened its policy on responsibility within the area by requiring in a 2025 plan that soy must not be supplied from areas where forests have been cleared to grow soy, as well as a goal of independent verification of responsible production .
The policy must also live up to the European feed industry - FEFAC's guidelines for responsible soy.
DLG is one of the food companies that is leading the way and, with an effective sustainability strategy, this year will already reach as much as 60 percent sustainably imported soy.
What remains is the discussion about the actual climate footprint of transporting soy from one end of the world to the other. Here, Danish agriculture is also forward-looking. Several actors within the food sector in Denmark, which themselves have soya as part of their production, have thrown themselves into green proteins – extracted from a number of plants that are found in the fields here at home. Proteins that can be used in the feed for animal production.
Someone has spotted the leguminous plants pea, lupine, lentil and horse bean. The latter works with a number of Jutland business people at a factory in Hedensted. The horse bean thrives well in the European climate and is suitable for both human and animal feed.
Several companies have seen great potential in grass protein, as grass has a positive amino acid composition.
Insect protein is also being experimented with, and there have been positive test results with the fishing industry.
And most recently rapeseed has been brought into play as an alternative. Researchers on the project believe that nutrients from rapeseed cake and rapeseed can, together with the addition of enzymes, replace soy for animal feed.
However, there have been some challenges with digestibility in pigs in the first trials, which are being followed up positively.
With these many new opportunities in the protein area in Denmark, one could be tempted to believe that imported soy will really soon be a thing of the past in Danish agriculture. Because agriculture is under pressure to deliver concrete climate solutions, so here is perhaps an opening with green proteins.
An increased production of green proteins on the Danish fields will have a positive effect on the sustainability of Danish cultivation systems, as it will create a greater diversity of crops.
However, the green proteins cannot stand alone just yet, and therefore it is absolutely crucial that imported sustainable soy continues to be a priority from both the sector and from the political side.
But there is speed in the development.
Recently, however, it emerged that an organic pig producer north of Kolding has started feeding his animals completely without the use of soy protein. Instead, they are experimenting with a combination of grass protein and residual products from the fishing industry.
Whether it can be an effective mix - also within conventional use - time will tell.
