Consultant: Canteens are too often caught in the trench warfare between meat eaters and vegetarians

Professional kitchens are in the process of reducing their CO2 footprint. But employees often find that they pay a high price for the change. But if the companies themselves develop a clear sustainability strategy, that problem can be solved, writes Line Rise Nielsen.
Meat is an employee right in the canteen. I had not imagined that this would be a requirement for the trade unions. But we saw that when the state tried to introduce an extra vegetarian day as part of the quest for a green transition.
The canteen is, in particular, the place where companies can minimize CO2 emissions and make a proper contribution to the green transition. Several companies have already found out – but many are reluctant to avoid conflicts with employee groups who want to keep their 'old canteen'.
The only option is to cut back on the meat
I've been remodeling professional kitchens for ten years, and I'd be lying if I said you can't tell the difference on the plate once the remodeling is fully implemented. The food becomes much greener. There will be less meat over the course of the week, the ingredients will be more Nordic and the dishes much more seasonal.
This is the recipe for the green conversion, regardless of whether you want to convert to 60 percent organic within the same budget as the public kitchens by 2030. Or if you want to improve the canteen's CO2 account, which the vast majority of companies would like, and which many is in progress.
Meat is – unsurprisingly – the big animal in the CO2 accounts, of which we have eaten accelerating amounts in the Western world over the last 50 years. Therefore, there is no other quick fix than cutting down on that consumption. The good news is that the new, less meat-heavy lunch can actually create an infinite amount of joy if the canteen staff are properly dressed for the task and they have a clear mandate from the company.
But it can create even more commotion if the support is lukewarm and the goal is unclear.
Company and canteen staff on board
Companies in particular have traditionally been afraid to change too much in the canteen. It is our common, daily break that is almost sacred. Yes, in fact, the canteen is typically the staff benefit that has the most opinions. I have seen several attempts to change the canteen's profile drown in the local canteen committee.
That selection almost everywhere consists of three types: Someone who wants meat toppings in a sandwich, someone who wants more salad, and someone who wants a gluten-free alternative. It ends up with a bit of everything, which no one really has ownership over, which creates a lot of food waste and a far too high CO2 footprint per employee.
If the restructuring is to be successful, the company must first of all take on the host and, based on a sustainability strategy, have a clear attitude to what it serves and why it does it. They must devote the resources it takes to change a food tradition, which is one of the strongest traditions we have.
If you only do it half way, the canteen staff lose the spirit and the employees lose faith. And if you use the classic method, you quickly encounter resistance.
Scrap the vegetarian day
Here are a few fresh examples. The very word 'vegetarian' is a red rag for many. For example, as mentioned, it triggered an outcry when the state announced demands for an additional weekly vegetarian day in their canteens.
Fewer people would have thought about it if they had simply announced that there would be 20 percent less meat over the course of the week. It was also not wise to advertise with 'vegetarian leek pie' or 'leek pie without bacon'. And you don't need to be reminded that the chili is 'sin carne' either.
If we don't call it anything, but simply change the ratio between meat and vegetables, few people will notice the change.
Few people actually think that the food is vegetarian, if only they experience it as delicious, filling and tasty.
Here, my experience is almost unequivocal: if you leave the practical responsibility to the canteen, ensure that they are professionally prepared for the task, and release them from the constraints, much better food comes out of it. Furthermore, I have experienced how the new freedoms within clear sustainability goals make the canteen a more attractive workplace for the new generation of chefs who originally dreamed of working in a Michelin restaurant.
I have even experienced several canteens where they went all the way and cut the large buffet down to one fixed daily menu. Many were nervous about the reaction. But, contrary to expectations, the canteen gained more employees as customers - and much more satisfied customers.
Suddenly there was a community about the lunch, which was now cherished, and which tasted good and almost gave a feeling of going out to eat. Gone were vegetarian days, an unambitious salad bar, a small obligatory gluten-free bowl and charcuterie platter, which was mostly eaten because it was easily decipherable and looked like it at home.
And most importantly – gone was the trench warfare for meat.
