Food culture: Rigid eating habits make it difficult for pulses to enter the Danes' dining tables

It is soon only the force of habit and the inertia of our food culture that holds us back. Unfortunately, these are powerful forces that are difficult to overcome alone. Therefore, we need a push from some of those who have power over our meals, writes Judith Kyst.
"Is the crisis scratching in your kitchen? So cook a kilo of chickpeas or add lentils to your meat sauce."
Such a household council could make several ends meet when we want to take care of the climate, the body and the dwindling balance of the credit card. Yet it's advice few of us are inclined to follow in practice.
Madkulturen's figures show this time and time again: Only one in four evening meals contains legumes. Half of us rarely or never eat them. And the recommendation of 100 grams a day is miles away from a reality where we only reach 2.4 grams, according to the Danish Food and Food Administration.
Those numbers make people like me tear our hair out a little. Although we all know the simple explanation: We are all creatures of habit who do as we usually do. And usually favors canonized Danish meat dishes over, for example, well-seasoned overseas classics with lentils and chickpeas in the main role.
A bean for every food culture
In the Middle East, it is difficult to imagine everyday life without hummus. In Mexico, frijoles are on the menu morning, noon and night. In Inden, dahl dominates. And in England, baked beans are so naturally part of the diet that they are referred to as a raw material on a par with typical vegetables.
In Denmark, we used to have the pea as the national leguminous fruit, which was part of countless ordinary dishes. During the war of 1864, for example, dried peas were a regular part of the field ration, which certainly did not make the common soldier either jump or frown.
But today there are no real legume dishes on the Danes' top ten. First, quite a bit further down the ranking comes chili con carne, which in its typical Danish version consists of meat with a cosmetic sidekick of kidney beans. Thus, the dish becomes the exception that confirms the rule of a food culture where legumes shine by their sad absence.
We simply have to do something about it. The soup needs new beans!
Soaked and ready to cook
For years we have been soaking in climate food advice and good arguments for more pulses. We have access to all kinds of good recipes. And gradually it is possible to get your hands on beans, lentils and peas of all kinds - including Danish ones of good quality.
So has there been no development - if nothing else in our attitude and readiness to accept pulses as part of everyday food? There is actually some evidence of that.
A recent study from the University of Copenhagen showed that Danes' knowledge of pulses is relatively high compared to other countries - despite the low consumption.
And in a fresh survey from Madkulturen, half of us answer that we would like to eat more pulses, while only one in eight rejects it. Half of us think that legumes fit well into the dishes we already eat. And very few people find it a problem to offer pulses to others.
In other words: It is soon only the force of habit and the inertia of our food culture that holds us back. Unfortunately, these are powerful forces that are difficult to overcome alone. Therefore, we need a push from some of those who have power over our meals.
Buy the canteen menu and the purchased meals
A great many of us get a daily lunch made by others – 650,000 from public kitchens alone, to which are added the private canteens. Furthermore, on a normal evening, one in four eats takeaway, restaurant food or ready meals.
By contracting out the cooking, we open a flank for someone to change our habits and introduce the vegetarian dishes that will soon become the new normal. That step is easier to take for food professionals than for the rest of us, who mostly plan and shop at the last minute, and for two-thirds of whom find it difficult to come up with good legume dishes.
For progressive canteen workers, chefs and kitchen staff, it is good news that we are no longer really afraid of pulses. It is no longer necessary to list lentils in the meat pots or apologize for introducing a weekly vegetarian day. Something that more and more people are open to, and that some even expect. Secondly, this kind of initiative can pave the way for the necessary introduction of legumes into our own cooking at home.
Let the youth carry the prayers forward
A good one-sixth of Danes are already so familiar with pulses that they eat them at least a few times a week. They constitute a leguminous elite who can lead the way and drag others along. My appeal to them is: Don't hold back - the future is yours!
The same could of course be said for the new generations who will shape the food culture in the coming decades. But we as a society have a special responsibility towards them. A responsibility to not just reproduce food culture as we know it, but to introduce a new world of possibilities.
Not least for good food with beans, lentils and peas.