School milk is big capital's wettest dream - and Copenhagen should still scrap it

There are neither red-green nor liberal arguments for preserving school milk. Even so, several parties at City Hall will drop the plans to scrap big capital's wet, climate-sinning dream, writes Emil Sloth Andersen (R).
When I recently informed a media outlet that the Children and Youth Committee in Copenhagen Municipality, where I myself sit, had decided to abolish school milk in Copenhagen, the debate went wild. Simply.
The news was translated into Arabic and English. The civil war started in the comment tracks. Grave journalists were put to work. But the discussion is still very much relevant, because there is actually a chance that the school milk will now be preserved.
Enhedslisten has openly declared that they want to preserve school milk, and it seems that Venstre, as a classic Danish agricultural party, will support that course. Several parties may follow suit. It will only cost DKK 1.5 million to reintroduce school milk during the budget negotiations for 2023 until September.
So let's have the principled debate about whether we should even have school milk in Copenhagen, the capital area and for that matter in the whole country.
In my view, school milk is most of all big capital's wettest dream. It is also the unrestrained commercial entry of one industry - at the expense of other industries - into the primary school without special, weighty health reasons. Add to that the school milk is also a climate emitter.
Let me go through some of the arguments against school milk and point out where I think food education for children should go.
First of all, it is recommended that everyone familiarize themselves with the meta-study "Reducing food's environmental impacts through producers and consumers". The study showed that the CO2 emission from milk production is higher than the emission from cement. Milk production also contributes to the cultivation of a colossal area of land that could have been untouched nature for the sake of biodiversity, when we compare with what almond milk, rice milk and soy milk use in terms of area.
In addition, don't forget that the Dane's milk consumption on average emits around 250 kilos of CO2 per year. Moreover, more than 600 liters of water must be used on average – equivalent to an entire rubbish container in your backyard – to produce just one liter of milk. You can hardly defend school milk with green arguments.
And does anyone think that the Dairy Association supports the school milk for purely altruistic reasons, or are the unreasonable number of Facebook ads for the school milk connected to the fact that there is great profit in establishing a high milk consumption among children at the age when habits are formed?
The different colored plastic lids and collectable stickers that belong to the school milk scream of the advertising industry's unrestrained entry into the most sacred halls we have - namely our classrooms.
If the school milk advocates have fallen in love with the Dairy Association's message that children should have more than 250 milliliters of milk a day, then they have bought a three-lactated cow, as it is called in Old Danish. Because the Danes are not in a milk deficit from an average perspective!
Moreover, only 24 percent of the children in Copenhagen use the scheme according to the Children and Youth Administration, and at the same time the user payment element means that it is unlikely that children from vulnerable areas use the school milk more than children from housing estates - until proven otherwise.
On the other hand, we are in deficit of a sea of other foods. According to the Danish Health Authority, 92 percent of Danish men and 87 percent of Danish women, for example, do not get enough fruit and vegetables. This is despite the fact that the emphasis in the new dietary guidelines is that we must eat more climate-friendly, including a plant-based diet.
You could choose to politically support this instead, as there is – to a certain extent – the possibility of converting EU support for school milk so that it becomes EU support for fruit and vegetables. The technical staff who distribute school milk today could, after all, distribute fruit and vegetables.
For the record, I must stress that no one questions the Danish Food and Food Administration's recommendations on milk. Depending on age, we should drink 250 milliliters of milk and eat between 15 and 20 grams of cheese a day. However, as the Danish Veterinary and Food Administration has just confirmed, there are no recommendations for when the milk should be drunk or who should serve it.
Nouvelle! It is difficult to find good arguments for school milk. Both for the red-green and liberals. As if it were an existentialist basic question, I therefore still ask: Where does colostrum come from? What is the logical origin of the umbilical cord for the advocates of school milk?
The discussion is of principle, because in the debate about school milk is embodied an important question about what we should do with the children's food education in the future.
If we are to raise ourselves a little higher in the helicopter, it has much more perspective for the children's food education when we as a municipality support sustainable, climate-friendly diet and of course the many diverse purposes that food has. Food can be a boost for the community and the taste buds - far more than that commercial school milk.
But the food's sustainable and community-supporting element are some of the measures that are also in Copenhagen Municipality's food and meal strategy, which can quickly be forgotten.
The conclusion is simple. The school milk is in reality neither a green nor a liberal project, but rather one branch's special commercial access to the children. Without heavy health-related justifications and directly against our Copenhagen climate ambitions.
In the name of the climate, biodiversity and free competition, I therefore say: Slaughter the sacred cow and drop the school milk. And let's instead support the children's green eating and drinking habits going forward.
